I OWE YOU

the three words on which the entire global system was founded, is based and will be doomed
OR
why developing democracies are and shall remain inherently violent
OR
why china can not take over the world from america without winning a violent world war.

Today we live in a complex and turbulent world that is very difficult to comprehend as a functioning whole. Innundated with a flood of detail information we wrongly believe that consuming and analysing this deluge will lead to a better understanding of this whole. We forget that this information is merely a component of the whole and end up chasin our own tails with vague words like "big data". The fact is poverty exists along with wealth, the world is both a peacful and a violent place.
In addition, the panacea of democracy has worked exceptionally well in the developed world but failed miserably to deliver anything but violence and more poverty across the developing world.
Why?
Why are some rich and others poor?
Why has china not yet taken over the world?
Will China ever take over the world and what will be the necessary pre-requisites?
Why are developing countries helplessly doomed by definition no matter how they are established or eforced?
Why are developing countries forced to chose between cargo-cult like copying of the ways of the developed world and pro-active self mutilation?
What does the future hold for our global society?
In this set of essays I propose a fundamental on which society has stood for millenia. If this holds, and I strongly believe that it does, then according to Lidy's law (https://medium.com/@tanayj/the-lindy-effect-and-betting-on-things-that-never-change-130880ec35af) we can use the fundamental to profoundly understand the nature of today's society, to comprehend its problems and their solutions and to predict exactly where we will be in the future with greater certainty.
These are not easy questions to ask and are even more dificult to answer using the flood of information we all swim in these days. What I propose takes a step back and answers them comprehensively and conclusively from the point of view of what I regard as the foundational pillar on which categorically all  society on earth is built, continues to be built, and will definitely be built in the future if society is at all to survive as we know it. This fundamental pilar is a very simple set of
three words "I owe you". These words are the fundamental bonds upon which civilisation (and the greater realm of nature) can be seen to be built, sustained and grown. The breaking of this bond has been, is and will continue to be the greatest destructive force we yield against society and nature as a whole. The future becomes intuitively obvious once this is understood.


From antiquity the fundamental unit of social cohabitation was the family. A sexually reproductive pair produce helpless/vulnerable children totally dependent on their parents for survival througout their development years. Granted this was re-interpreted in many ways over time and in different societies (e.g. the spartans claim to have been a nation family of sorts). In effect, in all incarnations of this scheme, the dependents were continuosly filling out one big long "I owe you" note piecemeal
redeemable in time by those they were temporarily dependant on for their survival and development. In the case of Sparta it was repayed primarily by fighting in the army, for others it could be as simple as feeding your childhood caregivers in their old age. The primary infantile care-givers be they individuals or groups, and being well able to aquire the pre-requisite sustenance surplusses, were willing participants in this long term, unwritten contract knowing that they will deminish as those that they gave care to strengthened and took over their responsibilities with time.
Given there continued to be more resources at hand than are required to susstain the care giver, they were happy to invest the surplusses by storing these in the care given to their dependants rather than allowing the surplus to spoil and be cycled back through nature in other means outside of their more direct benefit. If done properly they could draw down on this promisory situation as and when the tides of life and fortune turn against them and in favour of their dependents.
Sometimes this paid off less than others but on the whole and given the general availability of surplus remained adequate the investment continued to make sense irrespective. No documents were drawn up and the records were subjectively kept/interpreted (or sometimes taught through stories to the dependant members of the unit).

All the same, such investment was largely immeasurable and inherently emotional. The word emotional here is used in the philosophical tradition of Baruch Spinoza who believed that the emotions are indispensable representations of inherent voids in articulated and reasonable knowledge. The dependents  could not help but feel indebted to their temporal benefactors and more often than not, repayed them in kind if and when the situation changed. Though the system was not fool proof it had serious
consequences both for to reward compliance and to punish violation that stretched across time and space from the immediate to distant and future members of society. It was not until Darwin that these ramifications were seriously studdied and began to be better articulatedin what we refer to today as the theory of evolution even though we still tend not to appretiate its more subtle and widely infleuntial implications outside of biological circles.

Karl Marx tried to think this into an offitial theology about the way society should be goverened with catastrphic consequences in the parts of the world which tried to implement this thinking.He essentially recognized that the "I owe you" relationship between the benefactor and the dependent could be reworded as "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs". This was no doubt intelectual brilliance on his part, but unfortunately an over-simplification of a very complex
system that had already come a long and painful way from the pre-historic, sparsely populated world of nucleated hunter-gatheres. In fact, nature had already met and applied solutions to the very problems that Marx was contemplating as Darwin was discovering around the same time. However, for better or for worse, "Das Kapital" was more directly applicable to society at the time than the rather abstract musings in "Origin of Species". The "Wealth of Nations" by Adam smith was a more
pertinent representation of the opposition to Marx's ideas if ever there was one at the time.It promised great wealth in the benthamite prose of "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" . the great American nation was founded on it and over the next century proved superior to all the nations founded on derivations of Marx's ideas. Unfortunately today, it too and the resulting global system is looking systemically rather shaky after suffering a series of systemic
shocks the latest of which (the corona pandemic) looks set to at the very minimum, redefine it in terms that Adam Smith would be tasked to recognise as decendent from his core ideas.
Both streams of human ideology were attempting to solve evident problems that had become more evident/prominent with the birth and growth of the concept of the nation state. Both can be seen with hindesight as having failed in largely different ways and today we are grappling through the dark with historically capitaliist countries becoming more socialist with established welfare states while those previously on the diametrically opposite communist side are not only becoming more
capitalistic but very rich ones at that in capitalistic terms.
Again, Nature seems to be way ahead having met and organically solved these problems using solutions that for ethical reasons can not be reused directly by our societies and their leadership. Ethics coded by our lawyers has tended to traps us in a bind that does not allow morals to vary organically in line with the reality of nature. However, underlying all of this... the core pillar 'I Owe You' continues to hold society up even. However, the growing destructive
interaction we are having with this pillar continues to cause unnecessary pain and suffering.

The international reserve banking system, world bank etc can be considered a human institutionalisation of the 'I Owe You' principle. we could keep track of vague notions of it wrt family members but as societies grew larger and concentrated in smaller geographic regions the chances of stragers sharing no religion or history meeting grew. these stragers consequently more often than not conflicted in their view ot the world but they all had underlying this disparate view the core cocept of 'I
Owe You'. there was a need for shared systems to record these debts and inforce them across cultures and believes thereby minimising conflicts due to misunderstandings. these systems generally consisted of a central reservoir/ledger of 'I Owe You' records that was difficult or impossible to plagiarise. A case in study is the Yap, a macronesian culture that uses rai stones that are often too large to move anywhere as currency. Not only are they immovable there's no point
trying because each member of the culture know to whom each stone belongs so stealing them would be pointless. Onership is transfered without moving the stones and if a member of society does not own enough Rai they can find it difficult to marry or perform certain other costly interactions within the culture. The important thing is that this satisfys the requirement of an 'I Owe You' record.
All Banks are simply glorified versions of this system. they maintain a central record of who owes who what. Initially they started by individuals depositing their valuables (e.g. gold) with them. These individuals were given a receipt of deposite that meant they could go and pick these up at any point in the future. these receipts were easier to carry around than heavy gold bars and the individuals started exchanging them with each other in payment for services. Greedy as they were the
bankers realizing that at any one point only a few citizens would claim their gold and return receipts, started to print extra receipts and using these as implicit payment for their services of storing the wealth. these receipts have become the money we use today and usually bear the words "I promise to pay the bearer the sum of ...."
Today the banking system is one huge system of vats of 'I Owe You' receipts physically relised in everything from bonds, shares, options to phisical, unforgeable currency. However underlying al this complexity is one big vat of 'I owe you' records. The main difference is that in modern day society we have these things called Governments, central banks and other institurions (e.g. insurance, pensions, hedge funds) that have the tools to manufacture these I Owe You's. We have laws
and regulations that determine who can do that and how but on the whole, all that one requires is to provide something someone else wants and then offer it to that individual in return for an I Owe You receipt. If that individual does not have a receipt their are many brokers that can offer receipts today in exchange for more receipts tomorrow. Of course the price (interest) is dependent on the risk that the receipts will be paid back and the payments are anualised so as to distribute this
risk across time. But where do they get their receipts from?
Altimately all the receipts present in these exchange nexuses are brought into being by the central bank and distributed around as debt by the commercial banks. Some individuals directly work for the institutions to receive these others take them out as debt against assets they posses like cars and houses. It is at the point of collateralisation that society accepts and trusts these receipts because they know that each is at some point backed by physical collateral somewhere.
We all exchange these freely not worrying about which collateral and whether we shall ever have to redeem it and split it amongst us.
In fact, todays society creates collateral out of the debt receipts freshly minted by the banks, i.e. builders borrow to construct housing projects which they them mortgage out to tennants for cash flow (I Owe You flow)
things are complicated somehow when government enters the picture. the idea is that it provides a service we can not do without so we need to pay for it. this was initially done through taxes but these days the government can just issue government bonds onto the market secured on its tax revenues and receive immeduiate cash for its projects. In this way these bonds are a dilution of the I Owe You pool but that is distributed across the entire population as inflation which is
mostly seen as a hidden tax. the net result is though I still hold the same beare certificate in my hands the collateralisation process in so much as it becomes aware of the dilution requests more certificates to establish physical collateral. the government is a wealth redistributive engine in so far as it uses the bonds for societal welfare/development activities. It is a wealth concentration organ in so far as it uses an elite to act as the distribution mechanism for the newly
created I Owe you's. they will pick off the larger share in the guise of operational cost and the value that eventually makes it to the poor as redistributive is usaully both very small in comparison and late such that the collateralisation proces has already absorbed the change and they have to pay more for what they want so they remain pretty much in their state of poverty.
Exchange rates are the gates through which I Owe you's flow to get from one geo-political vat to another. these exchange rates are designed as road-blocks for the I Owe You exchange nexus and do not block the institutions that can create I Owe you's because potentially thier ability to create is infinite. It is those with constraints on how many I Owe You's they can get their hands on that care about exchange rates. In this way the government can at  high level enforce protectionist
measures.
there are three types of currencies:
-- Hard currencies which can be exchanged for local currency in almost every geo-political (e.g the dollar)
-- soft curencies, which enjoy some measure of international recognition usually amongst neighbouring countries
--- Local currencies, which are only recognised within a specific geo-political region.
Hard currencies like the dollar and the pound owe their prominence to wars and colonial conquest. the First world war reparitions system was set up and riven by america and constituted of the germans paying other nations reparitions for damages, other nations paying america for I owe you's borrowed from her to facilitate the war and America using the proceeds to buy collateral in the participating countries. Once America had enough collateral to suffocate the indebted world it
decided to lend them dollars with which they could continue facilitating its enrichment. so dollars would flow from america to nurture collateral in the indebted countries. Interst payments would flow back to america both on the original war loans and on the use of the new investment capital meaning America had more money reative to the rest of the world to play with and became the richest nation on the planet. the situation was simply re-enforced after the second world war and
lead to one of the greates eras of wester I Owe You wealth in history. It also gradually established the dollar as the global currency and America as the global Taxman. America could produce dollars at will therby diluting the value of the pool and enriching its self without causing inflationary worries because all the newly produced dollars had internationally recognized collateral both directly and indirectly established/created by the americans.
As China walked away from communism in the 1980's it brought to bear the worlds largest  and cheapest homogenious labour force. the hwhole nation of around 1 billion people was a potential factory to be exploited by the global system. It started to slot in but was too big to behave like the other participants. gradually It started to accumulate Chinese owned collateral mostly in the form of its labour force and a growing copy-cat technology and factory base. As it acquired western
technology it took it to the next level of production volume/economics. As more and more chinese got educated in western ways they went abroad and established a huge patriotic collateral base sending remmisions back to family on the mainland (probably the largest ever known) from almost every wealthy capitalist country on the globe. Suddenly alot of western I Owe You's were collecting in china agaist chinese collateral owned by chinese individuals which fed some positive
feedback into the system where Chinas production capacities increased both in size and technological capacity. All this time no one really wanted to own chinese currency and the chinese also started to raise walls against its use outside of the country. the western word didn't care because it relied on the model that hard currencies are better than local currencies but what china was doing is stashing up huge dollar reserves so that it could have the best of both worlds. A
local controled currency to rotect it against foreigh influences and a hge reserve of dolars to protect it against foreign influence as well. Al of a sudden the interest payments that used to go to America were re-routed to china in dollars as chna became the worlds factory but unlike others with it had the major portion of its collateral owned by chinese. It bought up American bonds to consolidate the flow o finterest payments its way in addition to the earnings as America's cheap
factory. the protectionist history of the west had lead to a rise in wages and companies were shifting jobs and manufacturing abroad in order to make the owners more money.
America did not care much initially because it can produce dollars infinitely but as china stashed up more dollar I owe you's it became a big player in the international I owe you market able to sway influence and support away from america especially with those disgruntled by the liberal markets poilicies of the IMO and world bank (the western worlds instruments of financial opression to the rest of the world).
Though china could carry out this power-play its international power was founded on the strength of America and the dollar. should america fall then all this clout would be for nought. they found themselves having to play a similar game to Japan and not flood the market with American I owe you's in order to protect their influence. they wer bound into suporting America even though on the outside they looked like they were now more pwerful than america.


- Economic slumps .. why keynsianism both works and does not work. the more it is used the more it will fail and if sed against non-monetary problems it will be a disarster.
- what is a hard currency and why is china's RMB not hard?
- The advantages the dollar gains from being the defacto world currency.
- How other western countries play the same dollar game at a lower scale yet maintaining the same wealth discrepancy
- Why the euro will falter n the sjort term but succed in the long term as political influence of groups across europe wanes in favour of having a communally stable vat of i owe you's and the collective advantage that brings
- What other political communities e.g. the east african econmic community should aspire to and why they wil fail to attain it unless they solve the core problem of inherently skewed  global distribution of I Owe you's
- Why zimbabwe had inflation and other coutries that think china is their saviour are destined for inflationary economic woes that will make zimbabwe seem like a holiday
- foreign aid as counter violence stabilisation, its removal as a means of toppling government
- sanctions as an ellaborate way of sucking i owe you's out of a country and diluting its pool e.g. zimbabwe and german reparitions
- global system and china and 'i owe you'
- stability of western societies brought about by 'i owe you' being institutionalised
- the developing world and failed democracy/violence as vent for frustration around their position
- Inflation as "prominenttly visible skew" in 'I owe you' that goes runaway if individuals can act against it
- China is cornered into being the richest of the poor(both externally by not being part of the rich club and internally by its puritan demographics and lack of multicaultural/multinational atmospher), distributing its wealth amidst fellow poor
- Why china can not take over the world without winning a violent world war
- the future, where will we be in 50, 100, 1000, 10000 years
- surviving the coming traumatic changes. maintain and teach your children to maintain tight control and care over thir collection of I Owe You's as well as watching out for collective dillution of this pool and hedging its inflationary skewing


- bentham et al had Darwin in mind but they too were solving the problem of governing states
they have also failed

Certain thinkers and leaders throughout history have elaborated on and executed this mantra towards disarstrous consequeneces. They all dreamed of making the world one big family but ended up killing and yet not achieving the goal.
what they all chose to ignore is that nature had already met and solved the very problems they were creating and solving anew. see, in antiquity, as the nuber of family units in contact with each other grew the family system rached its limits.
